---
layout: default
title: Wedding w/ Chris and Doug in Graton CA
summary: I'm particularly proud this was the first wedding I shot completely by myself, and everything went out smoothly! I arrived at the wine tasting room at 10am, and promptly Doug, one of the two grooms, put me to work. I especially like that he had an idea of the shots he wanted, which made my life a lot easier.
location: Graton, CA
time: Saturday, 1 July 2017
category: news
link:
---

I photographed my first wedding today, and for the most part it went well. Everything was under control, and the groom did much of the directing, which is helpful for a photographer without much experience. The lighting was harsh and direct, midday light in the peak of summer. I didn’t know if I preferred doing the portraits in shadow or direct light, but it didn’t matter. Photos like that are only important because they’re taken and staged, not for any artistic purposes. You have to get them out of the way—they’re one of the main reasons why they hired a photographer.

Sometimes I think every photo session is a chance for me to understand my equipment better. Today was the first time I shot an entire wedding in manual mode. I didn’t resort to automating any of the exposures -- only when the computer in the viewfinder tells you if you’re under- or over-exposed.I found this offered a little more control but reduced overall speed. Every photographer I’ve worked with has shot exclusively in manual mode (you can hear the little gears inside the camera ticking before they release the shutter), and that becomes more important when you introduce flash into the equation. Not very many photographers use automated flash (e.g. TTL technology), because the computers are still not quite as good or as reliable as having the right experience.

Near the end of the wedding one of the grooms spilled some champagne on his shirt at the winery, and right away he retorted, “The photographer’s done, who cares?” I remembered that line vividly, because it means so much. Appearances matter only insofar as they are recorded? That really says something about how people view wedding photography, or photography in general. The pictures become more important than the present; they carry the weight of the past on to the future.

I took 1318 photos in around three hours. Maybe I was feeling a little trigger-happy. The film photographer in me chastises the digital photographer in me.

The last few weddings taught me the importance of environmental shots, and getting them to be just perfect. A wedding photographer is also a product photographer. She has to capture the physical artifacts of the wedding and save them as part of the collective memory. This includes: bride’s heels, groom’s tuxedo before wearing it, various flowers, wedding cakes, appetizers, empty church, written memorabilia, etched glassware, other accouterments found in weddings. But I especially despise food photography. I don’t like it, it’s icky, something perverse, especially if the food isn’t all that great. What bothers me, I think, is that it’s essentially a meaningless photo about a mostly meaningless object (something to be savored in seconds, not looked at for eternity). Alas, it’s more depressing when you realize that most of the food is going to waste and is therefore used merely for cosmetic purposes.
The couple decided to host their wedding at a wine tasting room, then at a vineyard. I had to get a picture of them walking through the actual grapes in harvest. That only made sense. There were so many photos of them toasting and sipping bubbly wine. And, they made guests sign a heart made of wine corks. It was one of those things you couldn’t miss, because it has meaning written all over it. What makes a photographer interesting isn’t just how they photograph, it’s what they photograph. I’m not so interested in technical photographers; I’m interested in photographers that have something interesting to show me. The job of a photographer is to appropriate another person's work, put some spin on it, and then call it his own.

I believe in the studies that show wine prices don’t correlate with their quality, but lately, especially on days like this, I believe that people who drink wine are vastly more interesting than people who don’t. They’re willing to take life on poetically. They’re interested in collecting cork. These are attributes of people who like to socialize and have a good time. And then I realize: what matters in life and health isn’t what you eat or whether you exercise enough; it’s all about your social network, your family, whether you have people you can depend on for fun and for serious occasions. It’s really about having somebody who laughs at your punch lines, who respects your accomplishments and your failures, which is easy to come for some people and so rare for others, which I think is one of the most bewildering things to say in general about the human condition.

There was one musician at the wedding, a guitarist, who at one point played the tune Corcovado (I like it because it has a repeating two-note motif throughout), but nobody paid much attention to him, even when he sung (people react to the human voice more strongly among instruments), except at the very end, when one especially gracious patron said, “Thanks for the music,” but I think the opportunity to share music alone was a good enough gift… I asked him if he ever composed music, and he said, “Yes.” I took a few pictures of him, but I didn't get his card. Meanwhile, the head chef gave me his card and told me to take pictures of his creations.

I think about photography as a way of showing respect for somebody. When you disrespect somebody, you don’t include them in your pictures. When you respect somebody, you want to provide them images that they’ll relish and keep and use and share.

Every once in while I’m reminded by another photographer who uses digital photography to create something in-between still photographs and video. To capture something like a flip-book and let the viewer interpret motion and changes in blur between the shots. I do that for candids and while it contributes to photo bloat, I think it’s one of the more creative things you can do with a camera.

I guess I’m interested in taking unusually beautiful pictures, not just beautiful pictures. There’s a difference. It’s easy to take beautiful pictures. Most photographers and cameras optimize for beauty. It’s a little trickier to get them unusual at the same time.

The last wedding photographer I worked with (I worked with him three times) would assemble the groom, bride, and their friends, then issue the command, “Talk to each other!” It was terribly corny, and the people would say nonsense at each other until they were told to stop. And while it felt so stupid, so dumb, it worked. The pictures came out great. That’s the weird part about photography. So many genuine appearing pictures were so fake in the making.
Today was the first wedding I photographed by myself, and what a relief it was! Mainly because I didn’t have to deal with another photographer who was more superior and closer to the married couple. In the Tour de France, there’s a situation in which the leading member of the team, if he has a flat, is obliged to carry on the race and another teammate is obliged to give up his bicycle for the leader. This is especially important when the cars can’t deliver a second bike fast enough. I think this is an apt analogy to being a second shooter. You learn that the primary shooter is the star of the show; he dictates where the couple goes, the angles, the gestures and expressions. You can't get in his way or take his shot for him. Today I had nobody telling me where to stand, what to shoot, what not to shoot, whether I could taste the wine or not, whether I could socialize with the bridal party without seeming awkward, whether I can take pictures of certain people. All these things were either strictly prohibited or curtailed by the main photographer, who enforced this with a stringent contract. He gave me zero rights on the images.
But I learned so much from him.

I learned about the importance of detail. It sounds corny but he taught me to shoot less and to focus on the basics, like composition and the shape and color of the background. “Think before you shoot.” (Yeah, he was a bit pedantic). But he taught by example. The fact he used a 35mm f/1.4 and 50mm f/1.4 on two bodies attached to the waist by a quick-release belt harness, and the way he shuffled between the two cameras effortlessly, was alone a valuable lesson in workflow. He was the most exceptionally professional photographer I have ever worked with. He taught me not only about how to place yourself in the scene, but how to treat the client right and cultivate that relationship to the fullest. Today was the first time I had that feeling with the couple, and it felt good, like you were doing something somebody needed. Over the last few weeks I’ve wondered to myself why so many people are willing to pay for wedding photographers when they could just as easily take the pictures themselves. It is a deceptively simple question, maybe because the answer hints at something deeper: perhaps it’s that we are visually-biased creatures; images are more resonant than words alone. Pictures are more primitive; animals don’t communicate with words, but detect threats and potential reproductive partners with eyes. Language is a bit more sophisticated. But pictures play a role in symbolizing relationships. I think that is at the heart of photography: the relationship between the subjects in the photos, and their relationship with the photographer. For all that it is, photography ends up being a fairly superficial art, but an excellent way to transmit raw emotions and direct impressions.
